This photo shows CIA agent Felix
Rodriguez alongside a captured Cheay
Guavara moments before Guavvara was
executed in Bolivia. Unlike many
conspiracy theories about assassinations
and US intervention, the death of Chay
Guavara at the hands of the CIA is an
established fact. It is something the US
government put into motion and
documented in no uncertain terms.
The story of this assassination truly
reads like a great spy thriller with the
CIA's hunters prowling through the
jungles of South America in pursuit of
Guavara's ever evasive militant
gorillas.
Almost all conversations of Jay Guavara
engage in a black and white discussion
of whether he was good or evil. This
myopic line of questioning is both
fundamentally misguided and unrealistic.
Still, I believe this sort of analysis
is worth conducting or rather
dismantling.
Later in this video, we will do just
that. But for now, we may return to
Chay's death by beginning with his life.
At its core, the story of Chay's death
is a story of US intervention in South
America. It's quite striking just how
relevant this sort of tale continues to
be. Just recently, President Trump has
authorized CIA operations in Venezuela.
By looking at this story on ground news,
we can see how different outlets are
framing this ongoing US imperialism. And
indeed, the coverage seems to be miles
apart.
At a glance, we can see over 700 sources
covering this story. Left-leaning
outlets frame Trump's actions as ongoing
violent meddling in overseas affairs.
Meanwhile, those on the right focus more
on the intervention as part of a fight
against drug smuggling, glossing over
the death tolls of recent US actions in
Venezuela.
Viewers of this channel may have noticed
a pattern this year. Ground News has
been my only sponsor. It's because I'm
not interested in promoting some plastic
gadget of the month or the latest
attention sucking mobile game. I
genuinely believe in the work that the
team at Ground News is doing, and I
believe more people should be using the
service. Unlike other platforms, they
don't push or suppress stories to
influence your perception of the world.
Their platform prioritizes, giving
readers full transparency on today's
issues by pulling in the world's
perspective on them. Ground News can
detect each so-called unbiased outlet's
political lean, any history of failing
fact checks, and even who's benefiting
from you believing their version of the
truth. Sorting through the events of the
world and how they are being reported to
us has genuinely never been more
important. I sincerely believe ground
news can help us turn confusion into
clarity and even clarity into action.
Ground News is fully independent and
supported by readers like us, but I
partnered with them to get my viewers
40% off the same Vantage plan I've been
using. Go to ground.news/horses,
click the link in my description or scan
my QR code to get unlimited access for
just $5 a month. Find Clarity, support
the channel, and support your ability to
think critically. Thank you.
It's not necessary to detail the
entirety of Gavara's days, but we must
understand how he arrived at his death
in Bolivia.
Ernesto Jay Gavvara was born in
Argentina, but left the country at the
age of 25 for Guatemala. His travels
eventually landed him in Mexico City
where he made the acquaintance of Fidel
Castro. Fidel invited Sheay to join his
small guerilla movement which had the
aims of inciting Caribbean and South
American socialist revolutions.
This plan would begin in Cuba and both
men seemed quite optimistic about their
chances of success. In November of 1956,
Chay Fidel and 82 gorillas traveled to
Cuba with the hopes of overthrowing that
country's dictatorship, which was led by
a man called Batista and supported by
the United States.
The revolutionaries boat was immediately
ambushed upon arrival, but Chay escaped
and Fidel promoted him to the rank of
commandante.
It was in Cuba where the US first became
aware of the budding revolutionary named
Chay Gavvara. In 1958, the CIA sent a
spy into Chay's camp. The resulting
report described Chay as anti-American
and noted he was quote pretty
intellectual for a Latino.
Shortly thereafter, Chay led his men
into battle at Santa Clara. It was a
miraculous victory for the gorillas who
defeated an outsized force of US
supported troops. Fidel Castro was made
prime minister while Chay was granted
Cuban citizenship.
After the successful revolution, the CIA
continued to keep a close watch on Chay
Gavvara. Chay spoke throughout the
country and his speeches were often
recorded by the CIA or FBI.
But Chay's goals were not confined to
Cuba. The small island nation by his
estimation was just the beginning of a
much larger plan.
Chay hoped to extend the Cuban
Revolution to neighboring countries in
the Caribbean and South America.
He wrote of his time in Cuba, quote,
"The example of our revolution and the
lessons it applies for Latin America
have destroyed all coffee house
theories. We have demonstrated that a
small group of men supported by the
people and without fear of dying can
overcome a disciplined regular army and
defeat it. Of course, for the United
States, such a thing could not be
allowed to happen again.
The Americans had similar ideas to Chay
about the concept of guerrilla socialist
revolution, specifically that it could
indeed work, that such an uprising was a
genuine threat to even the strongest
militaries.
The United States imagined waves of such
revolts throughout South America, which
would threaten the US economically and
perhaps even ideologically.
Moreover, it was not difficult for the
Americans to envision these revolts
spreading properly into the United
States itself.
So, in the wake of the Cuban Revolution,
the US staked its priority. They sought
to reverse what happened in Cuba and
thus prevent further socialist
uprisings.
But there was a grave problem.
The US, for all its military might,
didn't have a federal apparatus which
could counter guerilla tactics.
After the end of World War II, the
American military strategy was based
upon massive retaliation.
If another country attacked US soil, the
Americans would deliver an overwhelming
response with exponentially more
violence. more specifically in the form
of a nuclear strike. So, the United
States had stockpiled nuclear weapons
primarily to deter any would-be attacks
from the Soviet Union.
But in the context of the Cuban
Revolution and other potential revolts,
then Chief of Staff General Maxwell
Taylor declared that massive retaliation
had reached a dead end. Taylor said that
a quote flexible response was required
to handle the new threats from the
Caribbean.
Eventually, a report was made by Henry
Kissinger that stated new mobile forces
should be created to combat guerrilla
fighters in less developed nations.
President Kennedy championed this idea
in a speech at West Point in 1962,
saying, quote, "Subverive insurgency is
another type of war, wholly new in its
intensity. War by guerillas, by
subversives, by insurgents, in short, by
assassins. War by ambush instead of
combat, by infiltration instead of
aggression. seeking victory by erosion
and exhausting the enemy instead of
honorably engaging him. It is in these
situations where we need a wholly new
kind of strategy, a wholly new kind of
force, and therefore a new and wholly
different kind of training.
Following this speech, Kennedy made good
on his intentions. He persuaded Congress
to increase the military budget by
around $3.5 billion.
He added thousands of new troops to the
American armed forces.
Kennedy also exponentially increased
special forces personnel.
Under Kennedy, the US military
stockpiled non-uclear weapons which
would excel in the new concept of
flexible response.
But Kennedy did more than just increase
firepower. He began reading the works of
Chay and Mao, and he studied these men's
writings on guerilla warfare. Kennedy
also had these books issued to troops
stationed in third world countries. In
the summer of 1962, President Kennedy
instituted the special group on
counterinsurgency.
A key part of their strategy was the
idea of rapid deployment in which the US
military took swift or even preemptive
action to stop guerilla activity before
it was allowed to escalate. They
believed that concentrating military
power in the very first days of a war
would be the key to halting aggressive
guerilla fighters.
Soon enough, this belief would be proven
pretty much correct.
Although there has been speculation and
rumor about a falling out between Chay
and Fidel, this was not the case. From
their first meeting in Mexico City, Chay
made it clear that his ambitions were a
global revolution, which he would leave
Cuba to pursue if the Cuban Revolution
was successful. So when Chay departed
Cuba in the mid 1960s, it was on good
terms and with full support from his
comrade Fidel.
Chay's vision of global revolution
brought him to the nation of Bolivia.
There were a few reasons why Chase
selected Bolivia in particular. The
Soviet Union, in his estimation, had
more or less capitulated to capitalism.
They had stopped spreading revolution
around the globe and instead had begun
engaging with large capitalist nations.
The most ardent desire for socialist
revolution, Chay believed, was now found
in South America, even if the ideology
had been born in Europe.
Both Chay and Fidel hoped to make the
Andes a sort of hub for socialism
throughout Latin America. The area could
be a training ground for guerilla
fighters and an epicenter for the
distribution of socialist ideology.
Bolivia was landlocked. Perhaps this
could provide a tactical advantage for
Chay. But Bolivia was also the most
unstable country in Latin America. As
the author Michael Steven Smith points
out, Bolivia had undergone 189 regime
changes in its 150year tenor as an
independent republic.
Among these, there was a military coup
in 1964 which saw the ruling
revolutionary nationalist movement
ousted by US supported Bolivian forces.
Should be noted that the Americans had
trained and financed these forces, but
did not specifically push for the coup
itself, at least if current public
record is to be believed. In any case,
Chevara believed that ending American
imperialism was critical to his wide
reaching socialist goals.
So, in 1966, Chay made his way to
Bolivia via Uruguay.
Anticipating his arrival, a CIA agent
had distributed leaflets warning people
to be on the lookout for Chay in the
airport at Monte Vido. Chay arrived in
Uruguay at that very airport disguised
as a businessman. He had shaved his
head, wore glasses, and wore a tailored
suit. This disguise worked. No one
reported seeing him at the airport, and
Guavara eluded capture before quickly
moving into Bolivia.
Chay set up a camp for guerilla training
at the base of a remote mountain in the
Andes. He planned to recruit and train
locals as guerilla fighters for four
months before engaging them in battle
against the Bolivian government. The
group was a mixture of Cubans and
Bolivians. Despite the modest size of
the force, things generally were going
quite well in the early days. The men
were taking to their training. Morale
was high. Chay was optimistic.
But on March 16th of 1967, two men
deserted the camp. They were found and
interrogated by Bolivian authorities.
The two men talked a lot. They revealed
the location of the guerilla camp, its
aims, goals, and even identified Cha
Gavara as its leader.
Police raided a farm where some of Cha's
men were stationed, and Chay's camp was
forced to relocate.
Bolivia and the United States were
hardly strangers. As noted, the United
States had arguably backed a coup to
elect the country's president, Renee
Barentos.
While modern opinion is divided on how
much the US wanted this coup, the
American government engaged amicably and
quickly with the new government.
US aid to Bolivia increased under
Barentos. The Americans worked to
consolidate Barento's regime and align
it with US interests. The United States
was also operating a school of the
Americas near Panama, where many of
Bolivia's top ranking military officers
had been trained. The CIA, like Chay
himself, had identified Bolivia's
instability and feared that Orienttos
was susceptible to being toppled in
another revolt.
The US ambassador to Bolivia, Douglas
Henderson, sent a telegram back to the
American government detailing the
capture and interrogation of CHA's
deserters. Both Henderson and the
Bolivian president were skeptical of
Gavara's presence, while Henderson noted
that quote, "We are taking this report
of guerilla activity with some reserve."
While the US did not act immediately,
the stories betrayed by the desertters
were something of a red flag to the
Americans.
Meanwhile, back in Bolivia, Chay's men
engaged in their first battle on March
23rd, 1967.
It was a success. The guerillas ambushed
a group of Bolivian soldiers, killing
and capturing many of them. Two of
which, who, in Cha's words, talked like
parrots.
Chay's men learned a troubling truth.
The Bolivians were well aware of their
presence. If the gorillas were going to
incite revolution, they would have to
act swiftly.
Word got to Bolivian officials about
Chay's victory. They came to understand
that the revolutionary movement was
becoming more severe and that it was
likely led by Cuban nationals. In the
wake of this recent defeat, the Bolivian
president asked the US for assistance,
noting that guerrillas could indeed pose
a significant threat to his regime.
The Americans sent a top officer to
Bolivia to assess the situation. This
officer found the Bolivian generals to
be quote archaic, impulsive, and self-
argandizing.
He feared that the Bolivian president
would bomb civilians in his hunt for
Chay, an act which would prove grossly
counterproductive.
So over the following months, the US
Department of State developed a plan to
train and prepare Bolivian Army Rangers
to eliminate CHA's guerrilla forces.
American
green berets trained Bolivian servicemen
in tactics, marksmanship, guerilla
fighting, and covert operations.
CHA's gerillas ambushed another group of
Bolivian soldiers, capturing 10
prisoners before letting them free. The
next day, after this fight, the
Americans finally got credible
intelligence that Che Guavara was both
alive and operating in Bolivia. With
this reporting, the United States
increased support and activity in
Bolivia. But the Americans believed that
a huge presence of US soldiers could be
counterproductive. So they recruited two
Cuban Americans as spies. Gustavo Violo
and Felix Rodriguez. These two men
entered into combat zones with the
Bolivian Rangers where they collected
information on CHA's forces. Among other
things, the spies confirmed the gorilla
number as 50 or 60 and more importantly
confirmed that Chay was indeed leading
the group. 20 years later, Viodo would
report that quote, "We placed a series
of assets and those assets began giving
us information we needed to neutralize
the uprising." That entire mechanism,
that logistical support left the
gorillas completely isolated. we
completely penetrated the urban network.
While this statement may seem
braggadocious, Chay's journals from the
time confirm some level of efficacy by
the spies. Chay noted that the outlook
for the gorillas was not clear, but he
was optimistic that they could
potentially outfight Bolivian forces.
Through the summer, the situation in
Bolivia worsened. President Berentos was
concerned that CHA's group would appeal
to Bolivian workers. He launched what he
considered a preemptive strike to
suppress this possibility. On June 24th,
the Bolivian Air Force struck a village
of hundreds of workers and their
families in what became known as the San
Juan Massacre. Death tolls have
estimated casualties ranging from 20 to
100.
While the Americans were not directly
involved in the massacre, they had
broadly supported military assistance
programs in Bolivia's mining areas, like
the one struck on June 24th.
Through a tumultuous summer, the United
States continued to support the Bolivian
military, who closed in on CHA's group.
CHA's numbers were reduced to just 24 by
July. Not only was the Bolivian
operation proving an immediate success
for the Americans, but the CIA also saw
its execution as a program which could
be replicated in other Latin American
nations.
In August, 10 of CHA's gerillas were
caught in an ambush. Nine of them died
and one was interrogated by the spy
Felix Rodriguez. According to Rodriguez,
this captive identified the people in
Chay's group and provided information on
their location.
Although word of the betrayal did not
make it back to Chay, he was well aware
of the perils around him, calling August
the worst month they'd had in Bolivia.
The Bolivian government continued to
close their fist around Chay, who now
had a governmentissued bounty on his
head. Chay's gorillas remained on the
move through the late summer. They tked
through the jungle without much purpose
other than simply avoiding capture. The
general mood among them worsened. They
bickered over minor issues, hurled
insults at each other, and continuously
winged to Chay about arguments and
offenses. One man even hallucinated a
platoon of Bolivian forces approaching.
This incident worried Chay, who became
concerned that war psychosis was setting
in on his small troop. The men climbed
higher in elevation, reaching a peak of
6,000 ft. They were headed towards a
small village called Alto Seiko. On
their journey, Chay discovered that
locals regarded the gorillas with
curiosity, apprehension, or outright
fear. One woman later told the Bolivian
army that she believed them to be
sorcerers due to their incredible
knowledge of the area and its residents.
After arriving in Alto Seiko, the de
facto mayor, who also owned a local
grocery store, informed the Bolivian
army of the gorilla's presence. In
retribution, Chay stole food supplies
from the man's store. But the mayor's
report was not exactly an aberration.
The Bolivian government had been waging
an effective sort of psychological war
on the gorillas for months.
To win favor with the peasants who Cha
looked to recruit, the Bolivian
government engaged in a wide-reaching
program of civic action. They built
roads in rural areas. They offered land
to impoverished peasants. And they
distributed free school supplies. They
also distributed significant
anti-gorilla propaganda, specifically in
the more rural areas of the country.
In one small town, the army positioned a
megaphone which constantly blared this
anti-gorilla messaging.
Months prior to Chay's arrival in Alto
Seiko, the government had also imposed
martial law on the entire province. They
notified the population that quote,
"Groups of Castrocommunist tendency,
mostly foreigners, have infiltrated our
country with the sole objective of
sewing chaos and halting the progress of
the nation, carrying out acts of
banditry, pillage, and assault against
private property, especially among the
peasantry.
The armed forces, conscious of its
specific obligations, has been mobilized
to detain and destroy the foreign
invasion, as malicious as it is
vandalous.
The Bolivian police arrested leftist
students and detained foreign-looking
individuals without cause. According to
the Bolivian Lieutenant Colonel Andres
Celich, this was all wildly effective.
and he noted that the entire local
population had been quote mobilized in
the face of a possible red attack.
A former captive released by Chay's
forces in August reported to the
Bolivian army that Cha Gavvara was very
sick and malnourished. Another report to
the Bolivians indicated that although
Chay did not remark upon his own
condition, his men had to help him
dismount from his horse because of some
illness or injury. Chay's journal
confirms this, noting he was sick with a
quote liver attack.
Recognizing the deterioration among Chay
and his men, the Bolivians dispatched
soldiers to establish a base within the
likely path of the traveling gorillas.
Chay's men marched on from Alto Seiko,
and indeed they were marching to their
own death. Chay had surmised that the
Bolivians were closing in with some
inevitability.
So whether he had lost his fight or
perhaps Chay knew the end was near, he
became more reckless, sloppy even as he
led his band through the mountains. He
marched in the open without gathering
intelligence. He did not seek the
support of peasants. There is further
little to suggest he attempted to turn
the tide during these days.
News of the gorilla presence spread
among local peasants. Local leaders in
the gorilla's path preemptively alerted
Bolivian authorities about Chay's men.
On September 26th, the gorillas reached
a tiny village called La Higua.
Chay sent a small group to scout the
next village on their journey. The
vanguard was ambushed by the Bolivian
military almost immediately after
leaving Laiguera. Two of the men were
killed, two deserted, three retreated
back to Laigua, but they had sustained
injuries in the fight. According to
Lieutenant Colonel Celich, the Bolivian
combatants suffered quote, "not a single
death, injury, or even a scratch."
After this victory, the Bolivian army
dispatched their American trained Army
Rangers, who began to comb the area for
their true target, Chay himself. The
Bolivians quickly found Chay and his
men. They engaged in a short firefight
before Chay and his group vanished into
a nearby canyon. The gorillas escaped
that particular fight, but they were
truly surrounded.
The gorillas sustained in hiding for a
few days, and by October 7th, they had
taken shelter in a steep ravine near
Laua.
The next morning, the Bolivian army
rangers were alerted to the gorilla's
position by a local peasant, and they
began to move on Chay's men. The
gorillas saw the soldiers approaching.
Jay ordered his men to get into position
for another firefight. The Bolivians
opened at 1 p.m. with mortar and machine
gun fire. For a group that was desperate
and hugely disadvantaged, the gorillas
engaged the Bolivians proficiently for
several hours. But eventually the
gorilla formation broke down. Chay's
rifle was hit by enemy fire and
destroyed. Another bullet hit him in the
leg. Chay tried to escape with one of
his comrades, but was cut off by a
Bolivian sergeant who held both of the
men at gunpoint. Chay Gavvara was truly
finally captured. His fight was over.
The Bolivians took Chay to a schoolhouse
in the nearby village of Laua.
The Bolivian Lieutenant Colonel Andre
Celich was among the last people to
speak with Cha Guavara.
When Celich arrived at the schoolhouse,
Chay was bound hand and foot lying on
the ground. The dead bodies of two of
his comrades were on the floor next to
him. In his private notes, Celich
recorded the conversation he had with
Chay.
Celich asked Chay why he chose to fight
in Bolivia instead of his home nation of
Argentina.
Chay replied simply, "Perhaps it would
have been better." Celich told Chay that
he had invaded Bolivia with a band of
foreigners, but they had failed and
Bolivia was now quote vaccinated against
communism.
Celich tried to prod for information
about the gorillas who had escaped the
battle. Chay replied with tepid
defiance, saying, "Conel, I have a very
bad memory. I don't remember and don't
even know how to respond to your
question." Celich replied, "Are you
Cuban or Argentine?"
Chay said that he was Cuban, Argentine,
Bolivian, Peruvian, Ecuadorian. He said
to Celich, "You understand."
When Celich asked again why Chay was
operating in Bolivia, Guavara replied,
"Can't you see the state in which the
peasants live? They are almost like
savages living in a state of poverty
that depresses the heart, having only
one room in which to sleep and cook and
no clothing to wear, abandoned like
animals." Celich noted, "The same thing
happens in Cuba." Chay replied, "No,
that's not true. I don't deny that in
Cuba poverty still exists, but the
peasants there have an illusion of
progress. Whereas the Bolivian lives
without hope.
Just as he is born, he dies without ever
seeing improvements in his human
condition.
The spy, Felix Rodriguez, arrived the
next morning at 6:15 a.m. He later
recorded his encounter with Chay.
Rodriguez said Chay was lying in the
dirt bound at the arms and feet. The two
bodies remained next to him on the
ground. Chay's hair was matted, his
clothes were torn and tattered, and his
feet were caked with dried mud. Despite
his appearance, Chay remained defiant.
He insisted that he would not be
interrogated, though Chay engaged in a
conversation with Rodriguez. Chay
admitted to his defeat, but refused to
answer any questions about his specific
operations in Bolivia. Chay could tell
that Rodriguez was not Bolivian, so he
asked the spy if he was Cuban or Puerto
Rican, if he was hired by the United
States. Rodriguez told Chay he was a
Cuban trained by the CIA.
Chay responded with a laugh.
Rodriguez's report says that he received
a coded message ordering the execution
of Chay. He claims to have tried to
dissuade the Bolivians, noting that the
US government wanted Chay kept alive
under any circumstances.
He further claimed that US aircraft was
on standby to move Chay to Panama for
interrogation. According to Rodriguez,
the Bolivians refused and told him that
he was to execute Chay by 200 p.m. that
afternoon.
Rodriguez spoke with Chay again and even
took him outside for a photograph. Some
of these photos have survived. When
Rodriguez led Chay back to the
schoolhouse, there were two more of his
dead men lying on the ground. Seeing
these, Chay stopped talking completely.
When it was time for Chay's execution,
Rodriguez claims to have embraced the
man. He said, quote, "It was a
tremendously emotional moment for me. I
no longer hated him. His moment of truth
had come, and he was conducting himself
like a man. He was facing his death with
courage and grace."
Rodriguez left the schoolhouse, and a
sergeant named Mario Terron was tasked
with executing Chay. Rodriguez told Tron
not to shoot him in the face. He noted
that Chay's injuries should appear as if
they had occurred in battle.
There's no reliable way to know Chay
Gavvara's final words. But if these
stories are to be believed, when Tron
came into the schoolhouse, Chay said,
quote, "I know you've come to kill me.
Shoot, coward. You are only going to
kill a man."
Terron shot Chay in the legs and arms.
Chay fell to the ground, biting one of
his wrists to stop himself from
screaming. Tran fired again. This time a
flurry of shots into Chay's stomach. At
1:10 p.m. on October 9th, 1967,
Cheay Gavvara was dead.
This is the story of Cheay Guavara's
execution as we can best know it today.
But reports and documents from the time
are rife with inconsistencies.
In some the US wanted him alive and
others dead. Some reports note that Chay
had died in battle, while others
disagree about who ordered and carried
out his execution.
Rodriguez's story is just the report of
one man. And taken in full, it is quite
flattering to Rodriguez himself.
There is also a letter to the CIA from
then national security adviser Walt
Rosto which goes to great lengths to
detail the importance of Chay's death.
The letter claims it reinforces the
trend of dead revolutionaries that it
discourages potential gorillas that it
shows the efficacy of quote preventative
medicine in the face of socialist
revolutions.
But this same letter also bizarrely
states that Chay should not be killed.
Amidst all of this, the CIA also has a
well-recorded history of obfuscation and
deceit. So any of their reporting is
subject to skepticism as well.
History leaves us with little choice
other than to tacitly accept Rodriguez's
report. In any case, Cheavvara had been
executed. Even if the United States had
not willed it to happen in the very
moment, the CIA had certainly arranged
for the death of Chefara.
The most prevailing question in
conversations about Chay is whether he
was good or evil. This is a road which
has been exhaustively well trodden.
Indeed, this itself is evidence of how
little utility the conversation really
has.
How many times can people ask a question
before recognizing that it really has no
answer?
Before we get into the core issue here,
there are two myths which deserve
dispelling. Chay Gavar's alleged racism
and alleged homophobia.
At 24 years old, Chay authored
explicitly racist words about black
people. But later in life, black
liberation and anti-racism became core
tenants of his ideology.
Like most people in the world, Chay was
a dynamic individual who held opposing
views throughout his life. It is not
accurate to call him an ardent racist or
a lifelong anti-racist.
There also exists a vague notion that
Cha Gavvara was contemptuous of
homosexuals.
This likely comes from the fact that
Chay founded a labor camp in Cuba. There
is much historical debate about the
particulars of what happened at this
camp, but there is no legitimate
evidence that it was ever used to
persecute homosexuals.
However, after the Cuban Revolution, the
Castro government required all men to
serve in the military. Those who could
not were assigned to work in
agricultural units or military units to
aid production, also known as UMAPs.
Within these facilities, there was
rampant violent abuse, often targeted
specifically at gay men. It could be
argued that CHA's labor camp was a
precursor to the U maps. Cursory
readings of revolutionary Cuba could
also lead one to incorrectly believe
that Chay's camp itself was a U mapap.
But in any case, by the time Castro
established the U mapaps, Cha Gavvara
had long since left Cuba. He simply was
not involved with the Cuban government
in any way. And Castro has since taken
sole responsibility for the abuses which
occurred in these camps.
Really, I feel this is much a do about
nothing. And to even cover Chay's
alleged homophobia and racism here feels
dangerously meandering.
Even if they existed, these are minor
character traits which would be pretty
unremarkable for the times in which Chay
lived.
More importantly, these things do not
explain why Cha Gavvara elicits such
divisive opinions among modern
audiences. After all, there are many
people we consider heroes who possessed
deep character flaws. Martin Luther King
cheated on his wife. Mahatma Gandhi was
a documented racist. So perhaps instead
for moral judgment of Chay Gavvara, we
could look at the violent deeds he
certainly committed.
Chay was a brutal, dedicated
revolutionary. That sort of life is an
expensive one. That life sentences a
person to becoming a monster.
Chevara himself was quite aware of this
reality once saying quote hatred as an
element of the struggle a relentless
hatred of the enemy impelling us over
and beyond the natural limitations that
man is heir to and transforming him into
an effective violent selective and cold
killing machine. Our soldiers must be
thus a people without hatred cannot
vanquish a brutal enemy.
But again, we falter. There are violent
figures throughout history who today
people generally regard as heroes.
George Washington, virtually all of
America's founding fathers. Even Nelson
Mandela was once a violent
revolutionary.
But these people are granted a sort of
forgiveness which Jay has not received.
So we must consider that there is
something exceptional about Gavvara. It
would be no huge revelation to say that
this likely comes down to contemporary
political ideology to say that quite
simply if you are left-leaning you are
sympathetic to Chay. If you are right
leaning you are not sympathetic. But I
think again this could be a fumble. It
certainly does not answer the question
of Chay's morality. And indeed it points
directly at the fact that there can be
no objective answer.
The question of whether Chay was good or
evil is only a mask worn by a more
truthful inquiry. That is, what do we
believe to be good or evil? What means
justify an end? Those people who like
Chay take extreme action for some
ideological cause are mirrors into
ourselves, specifically parts of
ourselves which are much easier to
ignore.
This sort of conversation, when
conducted without inhibition, leads us
down a difficult path. We reject the
placating easy statement that it is
never right to do wrong. We are instead
forced to reckon with our lines of
morality, to consider what might implore
us to redraw them or erase them
entirely. We are forced to ask questions
to which we may not have answers. What
in this world is worth our own
destruction? For what does brutality
become us? What utopia would we build on
the bodies of our fellow men? These are
the true questions that a man like Chay
leaves as his legacy.
Chay Gavara is perhaps the most
contentious figure in world history and
that will likely never change. I think
that is just fine. People need not
agree. We are all entitled to have views
and opinions based on our own personal
convictions.
But within this contention, we should
remember that we do not just assess the
events of the world. We also assess our
selves.